Page 1

Reporting
athe
violation
File
aSecurity
complaint
personalto
data
protection
Personal
Data Office

Inspector's
applicationData
Contact
with theUODO
inspector
Data
Protection
Personal
(DPO)
Protection

Enter the phrase you are looking for

Applications,
conclusions,
Applications,
conclusions,
petitions - general
petitions
letter
- general
letter
from
natural
persons
Contact
with
Request
theinformation
team
for sharing
Press (for
public
media)

Office helpline 606-950-000

President and Office

Tutorials and Tips

Movies

Right

Education

Cooperation

Tutorials

contact

» Tutorials » Tutorials and tips

Personal data protection in the election campaign - a guide
Election committees and other entities involved in the election campaign
they must comply not only with specific, directly regulating provisions
its course, but also the provisions on the protection of personal data. What does it mean
in practice - explains the latest guide prepared by the Office of Security
Personal Data.
Who is the administrator of personal data processed for the purposes of the elections
and what obligations does he have to fulfill? How to run an election company
respecting the principles of personal data protection? What rights do you have
voters? These are just some of the important issues covered in the guide
"Personal data protection in the election campaign".
It indicates which legal acts regulate the course of elections, in particular emphasizing the issues related to data processing
personal voters. It should be remembered that when processing personal data for the purposes of elections, one must also follow the rules
contained in the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).
The guide prepared by the Personal Data Protection Office (UODO) indicates, among others, what are the basic rules for the processing of personal data, how to understand
terms and definitions contained in this legal act. It emphasizes the importance of the role of the administrator, i.e. the entity deciding about the goals
and data processing methods, and indicates that data is processed by different controllers at different stages of the election campaign.
The publication also included a discussion of such issues as: the implementation of the information obligation by administrators,
documentation of data processing, reporting personal data breaches to the supervisory body and notifying persons
on a breach of their data protection or appointing a data protection officer (DPO).
A separate part of the guide consists of answers to frequently asked questions about practical problems
with the processing of personal data for the purposes of elections.
The guide, which we invite you to read, has been prepared with all entities involved in the process in mind
election - candidates and their committees, institutions responsible for the organization and conduct of elections, and finally themselves
voters whose data are processed. In the publication of the Personal Data Protection Office, the latter will find hints on how to exercise the rights they are granted
GDPR. So everyone will find information that may be useful to them.
2018-08-30

Attached files
Guide "Personal data protection in the election campaign"

President and Office

UODO hotline

Office for Personal Data Protection

News

606-950-000

ul. Stawki 2, 00-193 Warsaw

Right

open on business days from 10: 00-14: 00

kancelaria@uodo.gov.pl

Education

Working hours: 8.00-16.00

Schengen
Cooperation
Public procurement
Archive giodo.gov.pl
© UODO 2018 - 2021 All rights reserved.

Privacy Policy | Home | Contact | Fortress

