Page 1

INTRODUCTION OF NEW LEGISLATION IN THE FIELD
PROTECTION OF PERSONAL DATA
SHORT GUIDE FOR CITIES AND MUNICIPALITIES

From 25.5. 2018, the EUROPEAN REGULATION will be applied in practice
(EU) 2016/679 OF THE PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 April 2016 on the protection of individuals
processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, repealing the Directive
95/46 / EC (General Data Protection Regulation) (hereinafter "the Regulation") 1 and Act no. 18/2018
Z. z. on the Protection of Personal Data and on the Amendment of Certain Acts (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”)
or "Act no. 18/2018 Coll. ”) 2 .
How to deal with the advent of this legislation in practice?
What to focus on in the environment of towns and villages?
What to check?
Based on the " control questions " below from the different areas covered by the legislation
data protection, it is possible for municipalities and cities to prepare for the entry into force of the regulation
and the law and mapped the flows of personal data in their environment.

1

PERSONAL DATA FLOW MAPPING - GENERAL MAPPING
In order to comply with the regulation and the law in the environment of the operator, which is the municipality or
city, it is necessary to know how the "operator - municipality, city 3 " has in its conditions
addressed area of ​protection and processing of personal data according to current legislation. Just
the municipality / city finds out “ what personal data it processes and how it has the processing in its conditions
adjusted "where the weaknesses and what needs to be done in order to comply with Regulation
and the law; mapping the flow of personal data is the basis on which it can and should start
the process of aligning with the new legislation in the environment of any operator, ie
municipality or city.
Questions - general mapping of the flow of personal data
It is appropriate to "map" the flow of personal data in the environment of the operator municipalities, cities; specifically
• it is necessary to examine how personal data "flows" in the environment of the municipality / city: as their municipality
obtains and how it processes, on what legal basis such processing takes place, how
their municipality / city archives, on what legal basis it makes them available, provides them
or publishes, and how they are liquidated ;
• The purpose of this initial mapping is to review and determine the status of how
the municipality / city processes personal data;

1
2
3

https://dataprotection.gov.sk/uoou/sites/default/files/nariad_2016_679_text_sk.pdf
https://www.slov-lex.sk/static/pdf/2018/18/ZZ_2018_18_20180525.pdf
https://www.slov-lex.sk/static/pdf/1990/369/ZZ_1990_369_20161101.pdf

Page 2

• The aim of this first step is to “clean up” the flow of data in the municipality / city from the personal ones
data on which the processing of the municipality / city lacks a legal basis and the finding that
processing takes place without a legal basis and the disposal of such identified
personal data, or assigning them the correct legal basis, if any;
• The aim is also to eliminate " merging, interconnection or duplication " of legal bases
where it is inappropriate or outright incorrect, for example if in pre-contractual
relations or contractual relations, except for the contract " for security " municipality / city
also asks the data subjects to consent to the processing of personal data 4 ;
• The aim is to get an overview of the flow of personal data in the environment at the end of the mapping
operator (municipality / city) also with its errors and shortcomings, which subsequently, already
as identified, the operator (municipality / city) will address.
For the purpose of performing the mapping, it is also possible to use the questions below that you ask
the operator - municipality / city will answer and get an overview of the flow of personal data in its
environment:
a) Indication of the operator's data - municipality / city, address, contact details
municipality / city, indication of the statute;
b) Date of mapping - state the specific date of mapping,
where appropriate, the beginning and end of the mapping;
c) In which areas does the municipality / city process personal data on its own
currency - is the operator?
• Indicate the areas in which personal data are processed
natural persons by the municipality / city, it is appropriate to accurately identify these areas, ie
determine also the special law / s and its / their specific provision / on the basis of which
personal data are processed by the municipality or city 5 , namely:
Delegated performance of state administration;
I.
Performance of state administration - self-government;
II.
Internal processes of the operator (municipality / city) - human resources agenda
III.
and wages, employee health and safety agenda, other employee training,
employee attendance, company motor vehicles, business trips

2

employees, etc.
d) What categories of personal data does the municipality / city process? It is necessary to make a basis
the above list of legal bases (most often special laws
and possibly consent) to identify which specific categories (possibly also specific
personal data) personal data are processed by the municipality / city:

4 Requiring

the sending of consent to the processing of personal data for the purposes of the selection procedure and its evaluation; it is not necessary as

specifically, the selection procedure is a pre-contractual relationship, ie the legal basis for the processing of personal data is now § 10 para. 3 letter b) of the Act
no. 122/2013 Coll. and from 25.5.2018 the legal basis will be Art. 6 par. 1 letter (b) of the Regulation.
5 For example, agendas: Human Resources and Wages, Population Register, Registry, Chief Comptroller, Local Taxes and Fees, Decision-Making in
Environmental Affairs, Joint Office - Environmental Decision-Making, Social Welfare, Building Authority, Joint Office
building office, CCTV - public space, Promotion, Complaints, Litigation, Registry administration, Reporting
anti-social activities, School office, Pupil records, School canteen, Accounting documents, Municipal council, Applications under
info law, Evidence of events, Law of petition, General library, Contractual relations

Page 3

• "ordinary" personal data such as name, surname, address, date of birth, etc.,
do not forget that from 25.5.2018 the birth number will no longer be a special category of personal
data, but ordinary personal data (for more details § 78 paragraph 4 of Act No. 18/2018 Coll.);
• special categories of personal data (Article 9 of the Regulation, or § 16 paragraph 1 of Act No.
18/2018 Coll.) Such as personal data related to health, membership
in trade unions, personal data relating to religion or
worldview, etc.,
• personal data relating to the admission of guilt for criminal offenses and misdemeanors; Art. 10 of the Regulation
e) Identification of the person concerned; it is necessary that on the basis of the above elaborated
the analysis was supplemented by the position of the person concerned vis-à-vis the operator
municipality / city within the specific purpose of processing (for example: citizen, deputy
municipal / city council - is affected and the authorized person at the same time,
taxpayer, taxpayer, employee, debtor, complainant, etc.);
f) What is the legal basis for the processing? 6 To be supplemented by the above
mapping the "legal basis" of the processing of personal data, ie whether the municipality / city
processes personal data on the basis of a special law, or will be on the basis of
Act no. 18/2018 Coll., On the basis of a contract. It also needs to be mapped
carried out with regard to the still effective Act no. 122/2013 Coll. and subsequently to legally
the foundations which, with the expiry of Act no. 122/2013 Coll. "Expire / cease
exist "have already been replaced in the mapping by the" new "legal bases under

3

regulations or laws that will apply from 25.5.2018 (for example, monitoring
according to § 15 par. 7 of Act no. 122/2013 Coll. will be replaced by processing on the basis of
fulfillment of obligations in the public interest pursuant to Art. 6 par. 1 letter (e) regulations, or
for example, processing according to § 15 par. 6 second sentence 122/2013 Coll. will be replaced
processing for the purposes of a legitimate interest pursuant to Art. 6 par. 1 letter (e) of the Regulation
etc.).
g) Determination of purposes. It is necessary to assign purposes to the data obtained so far
processing of personal data, ie what is the purpose of the data in question
on the basis of a special law, the municipality / city processes it. For example, fulfilling information
Social Insurance Agency about the employee of the municipal office, which follows the municipality
in the position of employer / operator from the above identified legal
basis - a special law.
h) Where and how does the municipality / city archive personal data?
• The answer here will be, for example, that the municipality / city has an optical archive - for example
cloud / "paper" classic archive;
• It is also necessary to specify the parameters of the repository or archive of the municipality / city;
that is, if the municipality / city has an optical archive, it is operated technically by the municipality, or this one
does the service be provided by an external company? If an external company, what for the municipality within the service
provides (only archiving or even liquidation or other services)? He has to have her
the municipality concluded an intermediary contract? Is it closed now?
• If the municipality / city has a “classic” paper archive, where is it located? If it's an archive
secured? What are the specific security measures? Who has access to it? How

6 See

Art. 6 par. 1 letter a) to f) regulation, or § 13 par. 1 letter a) to f) of the Act.

Page 4

the municipality / city will find out about the security incident within this archive (for example
security breaches, burglary, heating, etc.)?
i) To whom does the municipality send the personal data of the persons concerned? Who are the recipients of personal
data for the municipality / city in terms of regulation / law? It is necessary to name here
all intermediaries of the municipality, other state bodies to which personal data
the municipality / city sends, also for example law firms, if they represent the municipality or
city ​etc.
j) How long does the municipality / city process personal data? How the municipality has a defined purpose
processing in the context of time? You need to review and adhere to it personal
the data have been processed in particular within the time limits set by law for their processing
basis, ie the period determined under a special law or the period for which it was granted
consent; then it is necessary that, once the primary purpose of the processing has been fulfilled, they are
personal data have been destroyed or have been archived according to the registry regulations
municipality / city.
k) How long does the municipality / city archive and store personal data? It is necessary to look
and revise the registration rules 7 of the municipality / city (or draw it up if it is not), whether
it sets out the retention periods for personal data. The purpose is to
prevented the storage and archiving of everything for "ages" which burdens both
operator (municipality / city) and this is not correct even with regard to obligations
operator (municipality / city) who should not have personal data longer than
necessary in the context of the purpose, or for archiving purposes, after processing
for the primary purpose.
l) How does the municipality / city dispose of personal data? Performs liquidation of assets by the municipality / city
containing personal data under his direction or has a contract for this activity
external entity? Is this in the position of a mediator towards the municipality? If so, she has it with him
municipality / city concluded an intermediary contract? How does the municipality / city oversee
liquidation? The municipality / city is being checked to see if the liquidation has taken place as it should
did it not happen that the personal data was not destroyed / correctly disposed of? She knows
on liquidation of municipality / city records?
m) Does the municipality / city have intermediaries 8 ? If so, you need to adjust your contracts with them
and align their wording with Art. 28 of the Regulation, or to close them again.

4

After the municipality / city has mapped the flow of personal data, it will get an overview of what
what purposes it processes specific personal data, what is the legal basis of the processing as it has
solved archiving and disposal of personal data, will be able to set up processes so that
the part that now does not have it set correctly knew until 5/25/2018 to set it up correctly and also to
dealt with the change of some legal bases (which we know from Act No. 122/2013
Coll.) Which will expire on May 25, 2018 and also to properly "set" them in the context of the
Regulation and Act no. 18/2018 Coll.

7

https://www.slov-lex.sk/static/pdf/2007/503/ZZ_2007_503_20071113.pdf
Art. 28 of the Regulation.

8 See

Page 5

PERSONNEL SUBSTRATE - PERSON RESPONSIBLE 9
It is advisable for the operator to treat the personal substrate, which is with the arrival of a new one
legislation will be subject to some changes, in particular as regards the necessary documents in the context of the principle
proving the fulfillment of obligations and consistent processing of personal data with Act no.
18/2018 Coll. After regulation. Part of the personnel substrate of the municipality / city as the operator
in addition to employees processing and working with personal data (authorized persons), etc.
responsible person of the municipality / city.
Questions - Responsible person 10
1. The municipality / city has an authorized person in accordance with Act no. 122/2013 Coll. ?
2. The municipality / city notified the authorized person responsible (still authorized according to Act no.
122/2013 Coll.) Of the Office?
3. From the date 25/05/2018 money must be 11 village / city designated / entrusted responsible
person on the basis of regulation / law no. 18/2018 Coll.
• Does the municipality / city want to keep the current one or designate another responsible person?
• If the municipality / city wants to entrust / designate another responsible person, it must have a responsible person
authorized under Act no. 122/2013 Coll. at the office to log off and the responsible person
determined in accordance with the regulation as of 25.5.2018 to notify the Office + also notify its contact
data; it is ideal if the municipality / city does it in one step, ie logs off at the office
authorized responsible person according to Act no. 122/2013 Coll. and notify the Office
responsible person under the Regulation.

5

4. If the municipality / city has not yet had a responsible person in charge, it must entrust it to him
contact details to notify the Office 12 !
5. The responsible person of the municipality / city will be internal after 25.5.2018 - an employee of the municipality / city
or external?
• Will the responsible person be an employee? You need to be responsible
person has been taken into account in his job / activity description and to have a municipality / city
resolved any conflict of interest of that person.
• Will the responsible person be external? It is necessary for the city / municipality to close with it
a contract for consideration / free of charge on the basis of which it will perform for the city / municipality
function of the responsible person.
• Will the responsible person of the municipality / city be a legal entity - a member of a legal entity? Is a
necessary in the contract between the municipality / city and the legal entity (providing
services of the responsible person for the municipality / city) was specifically specified in the contract by the natural
person - the future responsible person directly by name and surname, specified.

9 See

Art. 37 to 39 of the Regulation and recital 97 of the Regulation.

10

For the responsible person in the local government environment, see also the methodological guideline of the Office no. 1/2018 on this issue, which will be
published in mid-April 2018 on the Office's website.
11 See Art. 37 par. 1 letter a) to c) of the Regulation.
12 See

Art. 37 par. 7 of the Regulation.

Page 6

6. Will the municipality / city, as the operator, use, within the possibilities provided by the regulation,
responsible person together with other municipalities (joint responsible person for several
municipalities)?
• If so, it is necessary to consider whether this responsible person will prosecute to perform his or her duties properly
obligations. If the answer is no, it is advisable and we recommend looking for another individual
or a legal entity (within it an employee) that would for the city / municipality
performed the function of a responsible person.
7. Is the municipality / city ready and aware of the obligation to provide everything to the responsible person
necessary synergies 13 ?
PERSONNEL SUBSTRATE - AUTHORIZED PERSON
The Regulation does not recognize the term " beneficiary ", but this does not mean that it will cease to be entitled
person actually exist.
We would like to draw your attention to Art. 32 par. 4 of the Regulation
“The operator and the intermediary shall take steps to ensure that each natural person
a person acting under the authority of the operator or intermediary who has
access to personal data, processed such data only on the basis of instructions from the controller with
except where required to do so under Union or Member State law. ".

6

We also dare to draw attention to Art. 29 of the Regulation
"Intermediary and any person acting on behalf of the operator or
an intermediary who has access to personal data may process that data only on
on the instructions of the operator, except where required by Union law
or the law of a Member State . "
It follows from the above provisions that the current instruction of the entitled person is possible
interpreted in accordance with the above-mentioned authorization of the operator in the environment of the operator
and instructions can be understood as specifying specific responsibilities to a particular employee
on the basis of which and according to which it is to carry out the processing of personal data.
Questions - Authorized person
1. Does the municipality / city have authorized persons (persons processing personal data)?
• Has a municipality / city of employees (permanent employment, part - time employment)
employment, employment agreement, civil service .....), other physical
persons who process personal data on its behalf?
2. Does the municipality / city have these persons instructed in accordance with Act no. 122/2013 Coll. ?
• Are these lessons current (they correspond to real lessons as well as to the real situation
and job description of a particular employee)?

13 See

Art. 38 of the Regulation.

Page 7

• If the instructions of the authorized persons are prepared in accordance with Act no. 122/2013 Z.
from. the city / municipality is obliged to check and supplement them in its environment
and update them in the context of the forthcoming Act no. 18/2018 Coll. and regulations.
• If the instructions are not up-to-date and there are errors, it is better to re-write them
(in terms of content it can be partially taken over from the instruction according to Act No. 122/2013 Coll. 14 )
already in the context of new legislation and call them, for example, “Authorization of the
persons ’.
3. Specific authorizations must be made known to the specific authorized persons,
employees processing personal data on behalf of the controller and to obtain evidence
that they are aware of their responsibilities, for example by signing the authorization
it will be clear that the employee in the conditions of the operator (municipality / city)
acquainted with his duties in the context of personal data processing and them as well
he understood.
4. The elaborated credentials must be kept by the operator (on the premises of the municipality,
cities - for example with the responsible person), are not sent to the office.
5. If the employee's assignment changes or his job description changes and thus changes
also the area in which it processes personal data requires authorization, as has been the case so far
instruction, updated at a given specific time (in the form of an addendum in the necessary section
amend).

7

14

https://dataprotection.gov.sk/uoou/sk/content/vzory-pouceni-opravnenej-osoby-0

Page 8

SECURITY - MAPPING
The regulation and the law no longer work with the term " security project " nor do they specify it strictly
specific security measures and titles of security documents as was the case under
Act no. 122/2013 Coll. The regulation and the law do not strictly stipulate the documentation concerning
security in the context of the fact that the controller processes sensitive personal data
via a computer connected to a publicly accessible network MUST be developed
to the given information system security project, as before.
Both the regulation and the law are more general in describing security measures. Security is
devoted in particular to Art. 24 and 32 of the Regulation, which only state that the operator
and the intermediary are obliged to adequately protect and accept personal data for their protection
appropriate security measures, such as pseudonymisation or encryption; or
they may also demonstrate the consistency of the processing by acceding to the approved code
behavior, etc.
However, within the framework of security, a parameter is created that needs to be assessed, which law no.
122/2013 Coll. did not know, the point is that according to Art. 32 par. 1 “ Operator and intermediary
in the light of the latest knowledge, the cost of implementing the measures and the nature, extent,
the context and purposes of the processing, as well as the risks of varying probabilities and severity for
rights and freedoms of natural persons, appropriate technical and organizational measures to ensure
a level of safety commensurate with that risk , '. Safety assessment and accepted
security measures with regard to the rights and freedoms of individuals have not yet been
necessary, from now on yes.

8

Questions - safety documentation
1. The municipality / city has a security project developed and updated at that time, or
introduced and updated security measures? If so, they need to be checked
topicality, if the municipality / city identifies a deficiency, it is necessary to deal with it.
2. It is necessary to identify the rights and freedoms of natural persons to the municipality / city as
the operator could assess whether the processing operation could take place
to their endangerment, or even to the occurrence of property or non-property damage to the affected persons
persons ( an example of the fundamental rights and freedoms of the persons concerned is the right to freedom of expression,
right to protection of personal data, right to letter secrecy, right to
life, right to religion, etc. ) .
3. It is necessary for the operator (municipality / city) to identify in their environment
threats which may cause harm to the rights and freedoms of the persons concerned and these
described and took appropriate action against them ;
• external attacks (= THREAT) - (specific form of THREAT >> eg: abuse
access to the PC on which personal data are processed (>> INJURY: for example, obtaining
knowledge that the person is a debtor of the municipality, a non-payer, so there was a violation of the right to
protection of personal data and, where appropriate, tax secrecy and possibly disclosure
financial aspects of the data subject, data leakage) >> resulting
security measure, for example: keeping records of individual accesses

Page 9

authorized persons of the operator at least in the most important and sensitive
agendas / voluntary logging + correct setting of access rights
and checking this setting ;
In view of the above new parameter for assessing the safety measures adopted
measures - the rights and freedoms of the persons concerned, the security needs to be updated
measures.

DOCUMENTATION - RECORDS OF PROCESSING ACTIVITIES
Previously used records (registration sheets), information system notifications and applications
on special registrations (special registration decisions), which were mainly formal
evidence of a personal data information system, two of which were sent to the Office,
they disappear.
Their "replacement", another form of keeping records of purposes , no longer about information systems
personal data, the so-called records of processing activities according to Art. 30 of the Regulation.
These will have to be managed by both the operator and the intermediary. Records have their
precise content definition in the regulation. They are not sent to the office.
In part, the content can be based on today's records or notices
information systems.

9

Questions - documentation - records of processing activities
1. The municipality / city has at that time prepared registration sheets, notifications, or approved
special registrations? In terms of content, it is possible to use information from these documents and these
to be added to the content structure of records according to Art. 30 of the Regulation.
2. The Office shall publish on its website a model record of processing activities,
the municipality / city can use one or create your own.

The material is not legally binding, it is only of a recommendatory nature as everyone's environment
operator or intermediary is unique and requires consideration of specific
differences.

