Page 1

Ensuring the conduct of elections and protection of voters' personal data
Office for Personal Data Protection of the Slovak Republic (hereinafter referred to as the "Office")
with regard to the upcoming elections to municipal self-government bodies
the need to protect the personal data of voters.
The conditions for the exercise of the right to vote and the organization of elections are regulated by law
no. 180/2014 Coll. on the conditions for the exercise of the right to vote and on amendments
certain laws (hereinafter referred to as “Act No. 180/2014 Coll.”). This law also imposes
municipalities a number of obligations for which it is necessary to process personal data.
Introduction
The operator, in this case municipality 1 , is obliged to take measures to:
with personal data for the purposes of exercising the right to vote and its security
treated in accordance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council
(hereinafter referred to as the "Regulation") and Act no. 18/2018 Coll. on the protection of personal data
a
addition
some
laws
(further
len
"the law
and change
no. 18/2018 Coll. ”). The municipality is primarily obliged to identify and describe all
processes in connection with the electoral agenda, in which personal data are processed
data subjects and the processing of personal data in accordance with the principles of:
• legality - the controller in order to be able to process personal data
legally, must have an adequate legal basis in accordance with Art. 6
par. 1 Regulations / § 13 par. 1 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll.,
• fairness and transparency - especially in terms of information provision
obligations in relation to the persons concerned who are entitled to be
informed of the processing of their personal data,
• purpose limitation - personal data can only be obtained for specific, explicit
stated and legitimate purpose and may not be further processed in a way that does not
is compatible with this purpose,
• minimization of personal data - the operator has a duty to consistently
comply with the processing of only those personal data which he has for the purpose of enforcement
the right to vote is enabled by Act no. 180/2014 Coll. It is necessary that the municipality
it processed only personal data according to the law on documents and sheets
no. 180/2014, it is also desirable that the one who produces the forms for performance
elections to ensure that personal entries are not made arbitrarily
data beyond the scope of Act no. 180/2014 Coll .; for non-disclosure and non-acquisition
personal data beyond the scope of the law, it is appropriate to teach in this direction as well
"Entitled persons" ensuring the conduct of elections,

Operators of the permanent list of voters are in the context of § 9 par. 1 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll. village.
"The permanent list of voters (hereinafter referred to as the" permanent list ") is compiled and maintained by the municipality, in the capital of Slovakia.
1

of the Republic of Bratislava and in the city of Košice the city district (hereinafter referred to as the “municipality”). He writes to the permanent list
village voters who have a permanent residence in the village. A voter can only be registered in one permanent list. "

Page 2

• principle of correctness - the operator is obliged to process correctly
and updated personal data. In this context, particular mention may be made
the obligation of the municipality to continuously ascertain the facts that are the reason
to change the permanent list of voters,
• minimization of personal data retention - the operator is
authorized to keep personal data in a form that allows identification
the persons concerned only for the time necessary to achieve the purpose
processing,
• integrity and confidentiality - proper security of personal data.
1. Records of processing activities
Records of processing activities according to Art. 30 Regulations / § 37 of the Act
no. 18/2018 Coll. (sample here: https://dataprotection.gov.sk/uoou/node/484) is necessary
update the purpose of the processing of personal data, which is to ensure performance
and the conduct of the elections, for example according to procedure 2 below :
Purpose of processing: Ensuring the course of elections, the agenda of elections, ensuring the agenda of the municipality
according to law no. 180/2014 Coll.
Legal basis: Act no. 180/2014 Coll .; The indication of the legal basis is optional.
Categories of persons concerned: voters, members of the local and precinct election commission, candidates
Categories of personal data: ordinary personal data; the municipality may optionally complete this field
also to provide an exact list of personal data.
Categories of beneficiaries: to be filled in by the municipality
Planned period for deletion: to be filled in by the municipality in accordance with special regulations and the registry
order
Precautions: to be completed by the municipality ; for example, a link to the documentation received will suffice
security measures, or describe in detail the individual organizational and technical
measures - election documentation is stored in locked rooms, access
to electronic data files is secured with passwords and in accordance with the settings
access rights, the data shall be made available only to authorized persons who act in accordance with
with the instructions given by the operator and others.
2. Information obligation
Above all, the municipality must be prepared to fulfill the information obligation towards
concerned. With regard to the information obligation, it should be noted that
municipalities must already have, in accordance with Art. 13 or 14 of the Regulation / § 19 or § 20 of Act no.
Applies only to municipalities that do not have the given purpose of processing in their records of processing
activities already defined.
2

Page 3

18/2018 Coll. fulfilled the complex information obligation they usually have
published on the official notice board or on the website of the municipality. Comprehensive information
the obligation means that it involves and informs the persons concerned of any purpose of processing
personal data performed by the municipality, it is therefore necessary to rely on records
on processing activities, where the individual purposes of processing are to be defined
and continuously updated.
We recommend that despite the existence of a comprehensive information obligation, which
should already include the purpose of securing elections, in accordance with the principle of
transparency, the municipalities have taken appropriate measures to provide the person concerned
all information referred to in Art. 13 or 14 of the Regulation / § 19 or § 20 of the Act
no. 18/2018 Coll., Which relate to the processing of personal data for a defined purpose,
which is to ensure the conduct of elections under Act No. 180/2014 Coll., Namely
in a concise, transparent, comprehensible and easily accessible form, worded clearly
and simply, especially in the case of information specifically for the elderly who
we place it in a more vulnerable category of affected persons. This makes the village easier to prepare as well
to address a possible situation envisaged by Regulation / Act no. 18/2018
Z. z., When the person concerned requests that his information be provided orally. So the goal
can only be the elaboration of an "excerpt" from the complex information obligation, while
within this document it is possible to subsequently provide a link, for example in the wording - more
information on the processing of personal data is available on the official notice board / website
municipality / on the notice board or in person at the employee of the first contact office.
What, for example, can this information obligation to voters look like?

Information for voters on the processing of personal data
Operator
Responsible person - contact

Indicate the municipality
Contact the responsible person shall be provided

Rights of the person concerned
the right of access to personal data

Yes
Yes

the right to correct personal data
the right to delete personal data

not

the right to restrict the processing of personal data yes
the right to the transfer of personal data

not

the right to object to the processing of personal data

not
the right to file a motion to initiate proceedings pursuant to Section 100
Act no. 18/2018 Coll.
Yes
Information on the data processed
purpose of processing

ensuring the conduct of elections

Page 4

legal basis
retention period
recipients
legitimate interests

Act no. 180/2014 Coll. on performance conditions
electoral law and amending
certain laws
to be filled in by the municipality
to be filled in by the municipality
not

transfer to a third country
not
automated
individually
decision-making, including profiling, no
Provision of personal data, in particular in relation to the voter 's obligation to prove his or her identity
identity with an identity card or other official document that it contains
the image of a voter and all the information about him in the voter list is legal
requirement in accordance with Act no. 180/2014 Coll. on the conditions for the exercise of the election
law and amending certain laws.
It should also be pointed out that the operator only demonstrates compliance
its obligation to inform the person concerned within the meaning of Article 13 or 14 of the Regulation / § 19
or 20 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll. and not whether the person concerned has actually become acquainted
with the content of the information obligation by reading it, ie there is no obligation to, for example
the document by which the operator fulfills the information obligation was also itself
signed by the person concerned or would even be required to be signed.
Equally important and necessary is to deal with the provision of information in the language
national minority / in a form intended for the blind and partially sighted in municipalities
according to a special regulation.
The municipality must not forget that it is obliged to fulfill the information obligation according to
Art. 13 or 14 of the Regulation / § 19 or 20 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll. also internally, in
relationship with members of the local and precinct election commission whose personal data
as well as in relation to individual candidates for
council and the mayor, where the purpose of the processing is different from the above
situation, this purpose of processing is the registration of candidates for municipal elections
council or for the election of the mayor of the municipality. As a way of fulfilling this form
the obligation to provide information orally is also possible
form, or in the form of a separate document. If personal information
have not been obtained directly from the candidate as the person concerned (Article 14 of the Regulation / § 20 of the Act
no. 18/2018 Coll.) We pay attention to exceptions from the information obligation according to
par. 5 of the provision in question.
How the operator can fulfill the information obligation in the relationship
to voters?
There are several options, especially the need for operators to think
also on the adequacy and suitability of individual measures, for example from a point of view
administrative complexity. An example is the publication of information on the bulletin board

Page 5

in the polling station, on the municipality's website, placement of information boards,
possibly the possibility of fulfilling the information obligation at the same time as publishing the information
on the conditions of the right to vote and the right to be elected on the official board of the municipality and on the website
the seat of the municipality, if it has been established, according to § 21 par. 1 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll. or simultaneously
with delivery of the notification according to § 21 par. 3 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll., Which are intended for
each household, and in which the municipality states the time of the elections, the constituency,
polling station, brief method of adjusting the ballot paper and the obligation of the voter
to prove oneself before voting with an identity card.
3. Security measures
In conjunction with Art. 25 and Art. 32 Regulations / § 32 and § 39 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll. is a
the controller is obliged to assess the risks in the processing of personal data
and taking into account the seriousness of the possible interference with the rights and freedoms of the persons concerned
adequate security measures, by which we mean technical measures
and organizational.
Part of security measures is, in particular, to ensure the obligation to
that any person acting under the authority of the operator; or
intermediary and has access to personal data processed only on the basis of
instructions of the operator ( obligation to instruct in the context of Article 32 (4) of the Regulation
and Art. 29 Regulations / § 39 par. 4 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll. and § 36 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll.),
or in accordance with a special regulation or international agreement which is
Slovak Republic bound. In practice, an authorization may also mean an authorization for
performance of an act or a similar document, of which they may or may not be attached
be at the same time instructions for the processing of personal data.
According to § 11 par. 4 of Act no. 180/2018 Coll. anyone who is eligible
to get acquainted with the data in the voter list, he is obliged to keep about them
secrecy . This obligation is also reflected in Act no. 18/2018 Coll. in § 79, which imposes
the obligation of the operator and the intermediary to be bound by confidentiality
on the personal data of natural persons who come into contact with personal data
at the operator or intermediary. In case they are in the polling station
present in addition to members of the precinct election commission, its recorder and others
other persons who have expressed an interest in observing the conduct of the elections, and
the counting of votes must be such that, in particular, those persons cannot inspect the
list of voters, or made extracts, write-offs, photographic records or
videos.
In connection with the fulfillment of obligations pursuant to § 24 par. 2 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll.,
specifically with the obligation of the voter to sign the takeover of the ballot paper by hand
and envelopes in the voter list will need to be individual district members
election commissions proceeded with this act in such a way as to prevent unauthorized use
making personal data available to other voters whose personal data are contained
on the same page of the relevant voter list. This can be achieved

Page 6

for example, by translating blank papers into the personal data of other voters located
on the list of voters, which will allow the voter concerned to see only his or her signature when signing
personal information. In the case of voting outside the polling station, seconded members
the district election commission shall take the same measures when signing the voter
protection of personal data of other voters registered on the electoral roll
As part of its activities, the Office also met with suggestions from citizens who objected
non-compliance with the discrete zone. The situation can be solved, for example, by marking discrete
zone by marking its contours on the floor, or correcting by members
the Electoral Commission that voters come to the polling station on an ongoing basis and to take over
ballots took place gradually, thus ensuring the confidentiality of the data
voters.
4. Selected application problems in securing elections
Something has changed about the processing of the birth number in the conditions of the new legal
privacy adjustments?
Birth number is no longer a special category of personal data (not included
to Art. 9 Regulations / § 16 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll.); birth number processing adjustment is
defined in § 78 par. 4 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll. " When processing personal data
a universally applicable identifier may be used for the purpose of identifying a natural person
according to a special regulation22 ) only if its use is necessary to achieve
for the purpose of processing. Consent to processing generally applicable
the identifier must be explicit and must not be precluded by a specific regulation in the case of his
processing on the legal basis of the consent of the data subject. Publish in general
the usable identifier is prohibited; this does not apply if the universally applicable identifier
published by the person concerned himself. “. Publish a universally applicable identifier
continues to prohibit, nor does the consent of the person concerned, this prohibition on the publication of a personal identification number
can't break.
In order for the controller to be able to process personal data in a lawful manner
the persons concerned must have a so-called legal authorization resp. relevant legal basis.
In this case, the processing of the birth number is carried out on a legal basis, which
is a special law. According to § 9 par. 3 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll. about the voter in permanent
the list shall contain the following information: a) name and surname, b) birth number , if it is an alien,
date of birth, unless birth number assigned, c) nationality, d) name
municipality, street name, if the municipality is divided into streets, inventory number and reference number of the house
permanent residence.
Obtaining the consent of the data subject with the processing of his personal data is
in such cases redundant and confusing for the person concerned, as
the controller has a relevant legal basis for the processing in question
in accordance with Art. 6 par. 1 letter c) Regulations / § 13 par. 1 letter c) of Act no. 18/2018 Coll.,
in connection with Act no. 180/2014 Coll.

Page 7

My personal data is made available to the members of the election commission, I am a voter
worried they might be abused?
According to § 11 of Act no. 180/2014 Coll. list of voters for each election
the district is prepared by the municipality from a permanent list. This voter list will be submitted by the municipality
the district election commission no later than one hour before the start of the voting and whoever is
authorized to become acquainted with the data in the voter list, is obliged to maintain about them
confidentiality and processes them only in accordance with the instructions (instructions) of the operator.
Processing of personal data of voters, including birth number for enforcement purposes
electoral law and in connection with its disclosure to members of the electoral commission
contrary to Regulation / Act no. 18/2018 Coll. Every operator, in this
In this case, the municipality is responsible for the security of personal data and is obliged to comply
security measures to ensure the protection of personal data.
What if a candidate list of an independent candidate or a candidate list
political party contains personal data that is not a local election commission
entitled in accordance with the exhaustively defined list of personal data in law
no. 180/2014 Coll. process?
Act no. 180/2014 Coll. defines a particular situation in which it occurs
to the processing of personal data and at the same time determines the list of personal data that is
the operator obliged to process may process them only to the extent that for
it is established by a generally binding legal regulation and it is not appropriate to extend it
a list of personal data beyond what is provided by a special law.
First and foremost, the operator should ensure that to provide personal
data beyond the list of personal data defined in Act no. 180/2014 Coll.
did not occur, for example by creating uniform candidate lists, which would
did not allow the data subjects to provide optional data / enter data beyond
those stipulated by law, the so-called providing personal data "for safety".
In the case of obtaining personal data, which is not stipulated by law
no. 180/2014 Coll. In order to ensure the conduct of the elections, the operator would have to
further processing have a relevant legal basis in accordance with Art. 6 par. 1
Regulations / § 13 par. 1 of Act no. 18/2018 Coll., For example with the consent of the person concerned.
The deletion of that part of the candidate list which goes beyond the scope of the law seems to be a suitable solution
contains "unnecessary" personal data, unnecessary for the given purpose of processing. This
the approach is also appropriate in terms of compliance with one of the basic principles of processing,
namely the principles of data minimization.
If the registration authority receives a list of candidates for registration, of which it is a part
there is also a voter list to support the candidate in the election, which contains the data
beyond the requirements of a special law, how should such data be handled?
The situation is similar to the previous case. In the signature in question
In the document, each voter shall state the name and surname, date of birth, permanent residence
means the name of the municipality, the name of the street, if the municipality is divided into streets, and the house number. On everyone

Page 8

the name, surname, title, date of birth and address shall be given on the signature sheet
permanent residence of the candidate. The operator, in this case the candidate
to the deputy, resp. the mayor of the municipality, who processes personal data for the purpose of obtaining
the required number of signatures of voters supporting his candidacy is hereby bound
the list of personal data defined by Act no. 180/2014 Coll. Beyond this as follows
may receive additional personal data, such as telephone number, e-mail
address only if it has an adequate legal basis for such a purpose
the consent of the person concerned. In terms of the new legislation on personal data protection is
it should be noted that the institute of consent is strictly formalized. Consent must be free
granted, specific, unambiguous and informed, to which the obligation relates in particular
inform the data subject of the right to withdraw consent to the processing of personal data.
It is necessary to inform those who will spread the petition to the public to be affected
persons have drawn attention to the provision of data only to the extent provided by law.

